# Orthodoxy
- There had been many local variants of Christianity before it became the religion of the empire
- The emperor in his role of *pontifex maximus* called councils of bishops to determine what the true doctrine was
- The first four *ecumenical* councils occurred during the late Roman Empire. Three more occurred during the Byzantine period. Many other regional councils took place too
- These seven councils attempted to find agreement on questions of God and Christ's nature (Christology) and their relationship  to each other
## First Four Ecumenical Councils
- Council of Nicaea, 325
	- Nicaean Creed
- Council of Constantinople, 381
- Council of Ephesus
# Council of Nicaea 325
- Topics discussed: 
	- **Arianism**: is God one or are Father, Son, and Holy Ghost separate beings
	- Date of Easter (Sunday after the first full moon after the Spring Equinox)
	- Donatist Controversy: Are baptisms still valid if those who perform them later become heretics?
- Result: Nicene Creed, Doctrine of the Trinity
- But Arianism didn't go away. Many leaders, especially in the East, remained ambivalent. Arianism soon became widespread among Germanic tribes
# Council of Constantinople, 381
- Reaffirmed Nicene Creed, with amended wording seeking to clarify the doctrine, which demonstrates
# St. Augustine
- He approaches doctrine through the lens of Neoplatonic and other philosophies
- Super influential on Western Christianity
	- Starts out as a Manicien 
	- Writes a book called the *City of God* 
	- Pronounces a lot of *Just War Theory*: Christians are pacifists, but they can defend themselves
		- Later justifies the Crusades
# Manicheism and Dualism
- Mani a religious teacher from Persia taught an elaborate "Dualist" doctrine describing the struggle between good and evil.
- Manicheism was influenced by ideas from Christianity, Zoroastrianism, Buddhism, some mystery cults, and Hellenistic philosophy. Mani thought to be the final prophet after Zoroaster, Christ, and the Buddha
- Manicheism spread widely throughout Mesopotamia, Persia, the Roman Empire, and even to China
- In the West, it became associated with Christian heresy
# Gnosticism 
- Manicheism is a type of gnostic religion. Believe in special knowledge that is inaccessible to unbelievers
- There are forms of Gnosticism, including Jewish and Christian Gnosticism. They emphasize the platonic teaching that the spirit is good, the body bad
- Christian Gnostics didn't believe that Christ came in the flesh. He is a spirit only, and His apparent earthly appearance as a man was an illusion that deceived those who weren't ready to accept the higher truth that He is only a spirit. The higher truth is made clear only to people initiated into the religion - like a mystery religion
# The "Cult" (Veneration) of the Saints
- developed over a long time
- It is connected to earlier Greco-Roman traditions
	- Families revered their dead, sharing a meal together on anniversary of death
	- Belief in "geniuses" or guardian spirits
	- Roman society got things done through "patrons" and trading favors
	- Patron deities for each town or for various causes abounded in pagan tradition
- Christians began to honor martyrs by celebrating a common meal, including the Eucharist (sacrament), at places where martyr's remains lay. in time relics were moved to church alters, and saints days were celebrated
- Martyrs were considered already to be in Heaven, where they could advocate as patrons on behalf of devotees. They could possibly offer protection and miracles
- In time, not only martyrs were venerated as saints, but also a few non-martyrs who had lived lives of exceptional goodness and were, thus, in heaven where the could intercede on one's behalf.
- Saints' relics were thought to possess supernatural power
- the cult of the saints became widespread by the end of the Roman era
- Some other cultures honor important dead people and attribute power to them
# Revolution in Late Antiquity
- By the end of late antiquity Christianity became a matter of national identity for Romans
- Being Christian and being Roman were one in the same
	- The diverse religious landscape of classical Rome was gone
# Decline of Rome and The World of Late Antiquity
## Byzantines, Muslims, and Germans
# The Fall of Rome
- Was there a fall? What may have caused it?
	- Barbarian invasions?
	- Exhausted farms?
	- Latifundia? 
	- Immorality?
	- Collapse of civilian control of army?
	- Lead pipes? (not very credible)
- The role of German generals and troops: *foederati* (allies)
# End of the Western Empire
- Romulus Augustulus the last emperor of the west, was killed in 476
- Thereafter the German kings ruled the west
- The empire continued in the east until 1453
	- They always thought of themselves as Romans
	- But the West saw them as Greeks or Byzantines
- Rome itself dwindled in importance
# The Goths and the End of Rome in the West
- Whole tribes of Goths settled in the former lands of Rome
- German kings were the new military dictators
- Population declined, economy was depressed, and government services collapsed
- Cities continued to function, often under bishops
- 