# Islamic Beliefs
- God is one. Incorporeal. All powerful
- Qur'an is the perfect Word of God written in heaven in Arabic
- Islam (means "submission" and has roots as "*salam*" = peace) is the true religion of Abraham
- The prophets, including Jesus, had the true religion, but it became corrupted
- Jesus is the Messiah, but not the Son of God or Redeemer
- Muhammad is the "Seal of the Prophets" the last and greatest prophet who restored the true religion of Abraham
# Hadith
- Collections of reports claiming to quote what the prophet said. *Hadith* means "account" or "report"
- Collected mostly in the 8th and 9th centuries
- The most important source of doctrine and understanding after the Qur'an itself
- Consists of a chain of narrators (the chain is called an 'isnad) and then the text itself
- Different branches of Islam accept different collections of hadith as authoritative
# Five Pillars of Islam
- Belief = "There is no God but Allah and Muhammad is his messenger"
- Prayer = toward Meca five times a day
- Almsgiving = care for the poor and good works, 2.5% of increase or just helping people in need
- Fasting = month of Ramadan (a lunar month) during daylight hours
- Hajj = pilgrimage to Mecca at least once in your life if you can. In the pre-modern world this was quite a feat and brought life-long honor to those who did it
# Jihad 
- The word means "struggle"
- Westerners sometimes see it as a basic belief but it is not
- It encompasses sharing Islam with others and working through trials in faith. In its most positive sense it is the religiously motivated effort to make the world a better place
- It is sometimes seen as holy war, and in the west it has negative connotations, just as "crusade" is a very negative term in the Muslim world
- The world is divided into Dar al-Islam - Dar al-Harb: Legal terms, not from the Qur'an or the Hadith
# Islamic History after Muhammad
- Under Muhammad, Arabia was unified
- The first four caliphs after Muhammad combined religious and political authority and were recognized as legitimate by all. They expanded to take over parts of Roman (Byzantine) and Persian territory in Middle East and Egypt.
- The Sunnis and Shi'ites split on the question of succession in 661. Reunification was attempted
- Battle of Karbala 680. The split was permanent
# Karbala
- Martyrdom is a point of special note in Shi'ism to this day
- In 680, Umayyad and kills Husayn Ibn Ali and kills or imprisons his family and followers at Karbala
# Umayyad Caliphate 661-750
- Sunni Umayyad leaders triumph over rivals, move capital to Damascus, expand west to Spain and east to Central Asia
- How might being in control of former centers of civilization have influenced Islamic civilizations? How might Islamic rule have influenced those civilizations?
	- Literacy, trade, philosophy, and science become and important part of the culture
Abbasid Caliphate 750-1258
- Begins as a result of revolt against Umayyads led by family of Ibn Abbas, who claimed legitimate succession to Muhammad through his youngest uncle's line
- The rebellion was also sort of Iraqi/Persian vs Syrian/Arab thing
	- The times were influenced by the fact that so many non-Arabs were now Muslims in lands of Mesopotamia, Persia, Egypt and North Africa. In many cases they were better educated
- Moved capital to Baghadad further from old Arab ties
- They lost the western territories. The Umayyad Caliphate continued in exile in Spain until 1031
# Golden Age (8th to 13th Centuries)
- Improved literacy: used paper, Arabic script
- Science: much better than Europeans generally
	- Math: algebra, geometry, trigonometry, calculus, concept of zero, Arabic numerals
	- Medicine, pharmacies, surgery, biology
- Preserved Greek classics that led to the Renaissance
- History and social science
- Philosophy
- Literature
- Architecture
- Tolerance for minorities
# End of Golden Age
- Military rulers and ethnic factions: local rulers acted independently of caliphate
- Umayyads in Spain eventually splintered under "taifa" or factional kings who were former slaves. 
- The Crusades caused some losses in Holy Land and Spain
- Mongols sacked Baghdad and destroyed the caliphate in 1258
- Ottoman Turks eventually prevailed as rulers of the east. The west was more fragmented